## 1.Introdution

Welcome to networking. I'm Nick and I'll be your teacher in this course. And I'm Josh. Nick and I have prepared a set of fun projects for you to tackle. We have an awesome coursed prepared for you. We'll be covering advanced concepts in networking. Such as software defined networking, data center networking and content distribution. You'll complete projects using a state of the art network emulator called mini-net to understand and explore these advanced concepts. Leading up to a final project replicating actual networking research.

Welcome to the graduate course on computer networking. The primary goal of this course is to provide a survey of the necessary tools, techniques, and concepts to perform research in computer communications. This is a project based course, and there will be significant emphasis on hands-on experience. In networking, perhaps more than many other subjects, realization is key. You can read about concepts or techniques in a textbook, but really the most effective way to learn networking is by doing. So, you'll gain a lot of hands on experience in this course. Through the assignments. In comparison to an introductory networking course, which you may have taken, this course will provide more in depth coverage of networking topics. And, it willalso offer a crash course in some of the available tools that are now available for performing research in computer networking. You will gain experience, with many of these tools, through the project based assignments in the course.

The course has essentially two components. In the lectures you will learn about cutting edge research problems in computer networking and you'll also gain the ability to come up with your own problems. We'll pick up the basics along the way as necessary. In addition to the lectures there are also a number of problem sets or assignments that you will work through. As you work your way through the course. The problem sets and assignments in the course will give you proficiency with the tools and technologies that are state of the art in the research community. That will allow you to follow through on the research ideas that you may come up with as we work through various topics in the course. There are tons of exciting tools to use, and the problem sets and assignments will help you gain proficiency with them.

It's also worth bearing in mind what this course is not about. The course is not an introduction to networking, so there are a number of basic topics that won't be covered in this course. In particular, we'll assume that you're already familiar with the basics of things like TCP, Socket programming, and so forth. Anything that you might have picked up in an introductory networking course. We are just going to assume as a prerequisite for this course. So before you proceed, it may be worth revisiting some of your old undergraduate networking course material. The course is also not providing any introduction to programming. However, many assignments in the course will make use of some amount of programming. So, some knowledge of scripting languages like Ruby, Python or Perl will certainly be helpful in some assignments. We'll be making a lot of use of a network emulation toolkit called Mininet and to use that tool most effectively, You will certainly want to learn some Python if you don't already know it. Don't worry if you don't know these languages already though. There's plenty of time to learn, in the course. Since the deadlines are fairly spread out, and the assignments aren't focused on knowledge of programming per say. But rather, the concepts that you are going to realize in the programming languages.

The course is broken into three smaller sub-courses. The first course will cover topics including architectural principles, switching, routing, naming, addressing, and forwarding. The second part of the course will cover congestion control, streaming, rate limiting, and content distribution. And the third part of the course will have modules on, software defined networking, traffic engineering, and network security. There will about three assignments per sub course, plus a final project.

## 2.Architecture and Principles

We'll begin our foray into networking by reviewing the history of the internet and its design principles. Networking today is an eclectic mix of theory and practice in large part because the early internet architects set out with clear goals and allowed flexibility in achieving them. With all that flexibility, does that mean we'll see the rollout of IPv6 soon? Only in your dreams.

In this lesson we will cover a brief history of the internet. The internet has its roots in the ARPA Net which was conceived in, 1966 to connect big academic computers together. The first operational ARPA Net nodes came online, in 1969 at UCLA, SRI, UCSB, and Utah. Around the same time, the National Physical Laboratory in the UK also came online. By 1971, there were about 20 ARPANet Nodes, and the first host-to-host protocol. There were two cross country links, and all of the links were at 50 KBPS. Here is a rough sketch of the ARPANet as drawn by Larry Roberts in the late 1960s. You can see the four original Nodes here, as well as some other well known players, such as Berkeley. The MAC project at MIT, BBN, Harvard, Carnegie-Mellon, Michigan, Illinois, Dartmouth, Stanford, and so forth. This is what the ARPANET looked like in the late 1960s. Here's a picture of the ARPANET in June 1974. And you can see not only some additional networks that have come online, but also a diagram of the machines that are connected at each of the universities. You can also see a connection here between the ArpaNet and MPLnet. Of course, the ArpaNet wasn't the only network. There were other networks at the time. Sat Net operated over satellite. There were packet radio networks and there were also Ethernet local area network. Work started in 1973 on replacing the original network control protocol with TCP/IP. Where IP was the Internetwork Protocol and TCP was the Transmission Control Protocol. TCP/IP was ultimately standardized from 1978 to 1981 and included in Berkley UNIX in 1981. And on January 1st, 1983 the internet had one of its flag days, where the arbanet transitioned to TCP IP. Now the internet continued to grow, but the number of computers on the internet really didn't start to take off until the mid 90s. You can see here that around August 1995 there were about 10 million hosts on the internet, and five years later there was an order magnitude of hosts on the internet. More than 100 million. During this period the Internet experienced a number of technical milestones. In 1982. The internet saw the rollout of the domain name system which replaced the host.txt file containing all the world's machine names with a distributed name lookup system. 1988 saw the rollout of TCP congestion control after the net suffered a series of congestion collapses. 1989 saw the NSF net and BGP inter-domain routing. Including support for routing policy. The 90s, on the other hand, saw a lot of new applications. In approximately 1992, we started to see a lot of streaming media, including audio and video. The Web was not soon after, in 1993, which allowed users to browse a mesh of hyperlinks. The first major search engine was Altavista, which came online in December of 1995, and peer to peer protocols and applications including file sharing, began to emerge around 2000.

Now, today's internet is experiencing considerable problems. And growing pains and it's worth bearing some of these in mind and thinking about them, as many of them give rise to interesting research problems to think about as we work through the material in the course. One of the major problems is that we're running out of addresses. The current version of the internet protocol, IPV4, uses 32-bit addresses. Meaning that the IPV4 internet only has 2 to the 32 IP addresses. Or about 4 billion IP addresses. Furthermore, these IP addresses need to be. Allocated hierarchily and many portions of the IP address space are not allocated very efficiently. For example the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has one two fifty sixth of all the Internet address space. Another problem is congestion control. Now congestion control's goal is to match offered load to available capacity. But one of the problems with today's congestion control algorithms is that they have insufficient dynamic range. They don't work very well over slow and flaky wireless links and they don't work very well over very high speed. Intercontinental paths. Now, some solutions exist but change is hard and all solutions that are eployed must interact well with one another. And deployment in some sense requires some amount of consensus. A third major problem is routing. Routing is the process by which those on the internet discover paths to take to reach another destination. Today's interdomain routing protocol, BGP, suffers a number of ills, including a lack of security, ease of misconfiguration, poor convergence, and non-determinism. But it sort of works and it's the most critical piece of the internet infrastructure in some sense because it's the glue that holds all of the internet service providers together. Another major problem in today's internet is security. Now while we're reasonably good at encryption and authentication, we are not actually so good at turning these mechanisms on. And we're pretty bad at key management. As well as deploying secure software and secure configurations. The fifth major problem is denial of service. And the internet does a very good job of transmitting packets to a destination. Even if the destination doesn't want those packets. This makes it easy for an attacker to overload servers or network links to prevent the victim from doing useful work. Distributed denial of service attacks are particularly commonplace on today's Internet. Now, the thing that all of those problems have in common is that they all require changes to the basic infrastructure. And changing basic infrastructure is really difficult. It's not even clear what the process is to achieve consensus on changes. So as we work our way through the course, it will be interesting to see the problems that we encounter in each of these areas, various solutions that have been proposed, and also to think about ways. In which new protocols and technologies can be deployed. In later parts of the course we'll learn about a new technology called software defined networking, or SDN. That makes it easier to solve some of these problems by rolling out new software technologies, protocols, and other systems to help manage some of these issues.

In this lecture, we will talk about the Internet's original design principles. These design principles were discussed in the paper reading for today, the Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols, by Dave Clark, dated 1988. The paper has many important lessons and we will go through many of them as we revisit many of the design decisions. Before we jump into any details let's talk about some of the high level lessons. One of the most important conceptual lessons is that the design principles and priorities were designed for a certain type of network. And as the internet evolves, we are feeling some of the growing pains of some of those choices. In the last lesson. We talked about a number of the problems and growing pains of the internet. And it's worth bearing in mind that many of the problems that we are seeing now, are a result of some of the original design choices. Now that's not to say that some of these design choices are right or wrong, but rather that they simply reflect the nature of our understanding at the time as well as, the environment and constraints that the designers faced for the particular network that existed at that time. Now needless to say, some of the technical lessons. From the original design have turned out to be fairly timeless. One concept is packet switching, which we will discuss in this lesson. And another is the notion of fate sharing, or soft state, which we will discuss in a subsequent lesson in the course.




